# sqltyper - Type your SQL queries!

sqltyper takes raw PostgreSQL queries and generates TypeScript
functions that run those queries AND are typed correctly.

For example, given the following schema:

```sql
CREATE TABLE person (
  name text NOT NULL,
  age integer NOT NULL,
  shoe_size integer
)
```

The following SQL query in `find-persons.sql`:

```sql
SELECT initcap(name) as name_capitalized, age, shoe_size
FROM person
WHERE
    name LIKE ${namePattern} AND
    age > ${minimumAge}
```

Converts to `find-persons.ts`:

```typescript
import { ClientBase } from 'pg'

export function findPersons(
  client: ClientBase,
  params: {
    namePattern: string
    minimumAge: number
  },
): Promise<Array<{
  name_capitalized: string
  age: number
  shoe_size: number | null
}>> { ... }
```

sqltyper does this without actually executing your query, so it's
safe to use, too.


## Installation

```
npm install --save pg
npm install --save-dev sqltyper
```

Or:

```
yarn add pg
yarn add --dev sqltyper
```

sqltyper generates TypeScript code, so it isn't needed on
application runtime. However, the generated TypeScript code uses
[node-postgres] to execute the queries, so `pg` is a required runtime
dependency.


[node-postgres]: https://node-postgres.com/


## CLI

```
sqltyper [options] DIRECTORY...
```

Generate TypeScript functions for SQL statements in all files in the
given directories. For each input file, the output file name is
generated by removing the file extension and appending `.ts`.

Each output file will export a single function whose name is a
camelCased version of the basename of the input file.

sqltyper connects to the database to infer the parameter and output
column types of each SQL statement. It does this without actually
executing the SQL queries, so it's safe to run against any database.

Options:

`--database`, `-d`

Database URI to connect to, e.g. `-d postgres://user:pass@localhost:5432/mydb`.
By default, uses the [connecting logic] of node-postgres that
relies on environment variables.

`--ext`, `-e`

File extensions to consider, e.g. `-e sql,psql`. Default: `sql`.

`--verbose`, `-v`

Give verbose output about problems with inferring statement
nullability. Default: `false`.

`--watch`, `-w`

Watch files and run the conversion when something changes. Default:
`false`.

`--prettify`, `-p`

Apply `prettier` to output TypeScript files. `prettier` must be
installed and configured for your project. Default: `false`.

`--index`

Whether to generate and `index.ts` file that re-exports all the
generated functions. Default: `true`.

`--pg-module`

Where to import node-postgres from. Default: `pg`.

[connecting logic]: https://node-postgres.com/features/connecting


## How does it work?

sqltyper connects to your database to look up the schema: which
types there are, which tables there are, what columns and constraints
the tables have, etc. The only queries it executes look up this
information from various `pg_catalog.*` tables.

First, it substitutes any `${paramName}` strings with `$1`, `$2`, etc.

Then, it creates a prepared statement from the query, and then asks
PostgreSQL to describe the prepared statement. PostgreSQL will reply
with parameter types for `$1`, `$2`, etc., and columns types of the
result rows.

However, this is not enough! In SQL basically anything anywhere can be
`NULL`, so if sqltyper stopped here all the types would have to be
e.g. `integer | null`, `string | null` and so on. For this reason,
sqltyper also parses the SQL query with its built-in SQL parser and
then starts finding out which expressions can never be `NULL`. It
employs `NOT NULL` constraints, nullability guarantees of functions
and operators, `WHERE` clause expressions, etc. to rule out as many
possibilities of `NULL` as possible, and amends the original statement
description with this information.

It also uses this information to narrow down the result

Then, it outputs a TypeScript function that is correctly typed, and
when run, executes your query and converts input and output data
to/from PostgreSQL.


## Prior art

- [sqlτyped](https://github.com/jonifreeman/sqltyped) - a macro which infers Scala types by analysing SQL statements


[sqlτyped]: https://github.com/jonifreeman/sqltyped
